xi
Foreword
Barbara Fister, 
Gustavus Adolphus College
All of us feel overwhelmed, at one point or another, by the 
seemingly unstoppable accumulation of mail in our inboxes, 
the stream of news coming at us from so many directions, often 
feeding yet more news across cryptic ﬂ  owing banners, the 
mysterious switchbacks we encounter as we navigate common 
medical advice – that thing that was good for you? It’s not, 
after all – and the frustration of hearing two equally passionate 
sides to every debate, when we know the truth doesn’t come in 
neat binaries. Information is too much with us, and too much 
of it is trivial or dubious or drawn from unconvincing evidence. 
But when we need to ﬁ  gure things out, we do the research.
Those of us teaching ﬁ  rst-year college students usually 
confront another problem that also feels overwhelming at 
times. Students have always had trouble writing research 
papers, but on top of the usual culprits – choosing topics 
that are too narrow or too broad, providing a data-dump 
rather than an analysis, misusing words, splicing sentences 
together with commas when they aren’t fragmenting them – 
we have to help them ﬁ  nd their way through an abundant 
but increasingly complex information environment. Instead 
of going to the library, students go to Google, where 
scholarly sources, advocacy, government documents, personal 
narratives, news sources, scans of nineteenth-century books,

xii
Engaging First-Year Students in Meaningful Library Research
and home-made videos are all shelved together, millions 
upon millions of documents available on any topic. If 
students are savvy enough to turn to the library’s website, 
they are likely to search an aggregated database that includes 
more articles from more journals than any undergraduate 
library previously subscribed to. They have endless choices 
to make, but they can’t fall back on a scaffold of understanding 
that more experienced scholars take for granted. They don’t 
know the simplest things: that books have indexes, and that 
by using an index or table of contents they could get 
information from a book without having to read it cover-
to-cover. They probably have never seen a scholarly journal 
in print, and don’t realize such periodicals are published 
serially. They think ‘argument’ means a ﬁ  ght to the ﬁ nish, 
not developing a reasoned position based on evidence. And 
they aren’t sure, but they think Time magazine is what their 
teacher means when they say ‘use scholarly sources.’
Lacking experience with traditional research tools is one 
thing; they also lack experience with developing researchable 
questions, drawing conclusions from evidence, examining 
sources critically, or having their minds changed when 
confronted with data that conﬂ icts with their preconceptions. 
And (though this is nothing new) they lack a sense of urgency 
or commitment to doing research. A research assignment 
is just another jump-through-the-hoops demonstration for 
their teacher, another checkpoint that will show they did 
their homework, however grudgingly. An efﬁ  cient strategy 
for getting through a research assignment with a minimum of 
effort, though rarely an effective one, is viewed as a survival 
skill, and rather than learn new ways to ﬁ  nd out about the 
world, students will almost always draw on whatever tools 
and strategies they have used in the past. They are busy 
people; they don’t have time to mess around. The fact that 
their college has a vast library of resources and their teachers

xiii
Foreword
have high expectations doesn’t budge them from their course. 
Google has worked before, and everyone knows essays 
should be ﬁ ve paragraphs long. Come up with something to 
say, ﬁ nd a few sources to support it, and you’re done. That 
shouldn’t take more than a few hours, right?
The research paper remains the most common writing 
assignment on college campuses, more popular than ever 
(Lunsford, 2008). In the ﬁ  rst year, just as students are 
encountering the conventions of academic writing, we also 
hope to ground them in the mechanics of using a print/digital 
hybrid library, probably much larger than any they’ve ever 
used before, to make informed choices among possible 
sources, and extract meaning from them in order to support 
a well-organized synthesis or argument. We know they will 
be asked to do this in the future, so we try to get them 
acculturated quickly.
This puts a lot of responsibility on those who teach ﬁ  rst-
year students the ropes of academic writing. Many instructors 
are dismayed to ﬁ  nd, when they collect drafts of papers, 
that the library tour they scheduled in the second week of 
the course seems to have had no effect at all. No matter how 
much detail they put into the assignment prompt describing 
how to recognize high-quality sources, the bibliographies are 
full of sites from About.com and Knowledge Quest. And 
worst of all, the students seem already jaded, indifferent to 
the thrill of the hunt or the opportunity to pursue a question 
they care about. Yet apart from preparing inexperienced 
students for college, instructors know that these skills are for 
life. We need citizens that can ﬁ  nd and interpret information, 
that respect evidence, that are prepared to question 
assumptions and ask the right questions. We know what 
happens in that ﬁ  rst year matters. And it’s not easy.
This book, written by an experienced academic librarian, 
is for every ﬁ  rst-year instructor who has tried semester after

xiv
Engaging First-Year Students in Meaningful Library Research
semester to reﬁ  ne their research activities with students, only 
to be defeated by a new crop of novices. It’s for every teacher 
who is puzzled by students who seem so savvy about 
technology, but so incapable of using it for academic 
purposes. It’s for every librarian who wants to work more 
effectively with the faculty who help new students negotiate 
an unfamiliar and challenging set of expectations. It’s for 
anyone who cares about the success of those ﬁ  rst-year 
students.
Molly Flaspohler, who has observed students’ confusion 
from the front lines of their forays into research and who has 
collaborated successfully with faculty to make research a 
more meaningful opportunity for learning, presents a well-
organized and entertaining review of what we know about 
how students today approach research assignments, suggests 
how (and why) librarians and teaching faculty should 
collaborate fruitfully, and offers practical, experience-tested 
pedagogical approaches to introducing reluctant researchers 
to the intellectual work of articulating questions and seeking 
evidence-based solutions, work that can turn novice 
researchers into engaged students, ready to take the next step 
in their academic journey.
Work cited
Lunsford, Andrea A. and Karen J. Lunsford (2008) 
‘“Mistakes are a Part of Life”: A National Comparative 
Study.’ College Composition and Communication 59.4: 
781–806.

